textabstractIn the last decade the primary treatment of  laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer was shifted towards organ  preservation, i.e. preservation of the larynx. The treatment of  laryngeal cancer was changed from standard radiotherapy towards  hyperfractionated radiotherapy. Hypopharyngeal cancer is nowadays  mostly treated with a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy  instead of primary surgery. Therefore, the greatest shift in  treatment protocols found was for hypopharyngeal cancer. The goal of  this thesis was in the first place to find out whether recurrent  laryngeal cancer can be treated with preservation of the larynx and  the consequences of organ preservation for the function of the “new”  organ. The second goal of this thesis was to find out which treatment  protocols are used in the Netherlands for hypopharyngeal cancer.  Also, to find the consequences of chemoradiation protocols for  surgical treatment of recurrent hypopharyngeal cancer. Chapter I is a general introduction of laryngeal and hypopharyngeal  cancer. The incidences of laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer are  mentioned. Furthermore, the biggest risk factors, being smoking and  alcohol, are described. Especially, the effect of tobacco smoke on  the development of laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer is described.  Tobacco smoke contains several substances, which can cause mutations  in genes. The mutations deregulate several enzyme systems and cell  regulation systems, which cause degeneration of squamous cell  epithelium. An overview of the other chapters of this thesis is given. In Chapter II two partial laryngectomy techniques are described. The  oncological and functional results of the endoscopic CO2 laser and  the frontolateral partial laryngectomy for the treatment of the  recurrent glottic laryngeal cancer are described. The indications of  both techniques are mentioned. Both techniques have good oncological  results and less functional problems were found. With the CO2 laser  44-58% of the patients are cured with preservation of the larynx;  with the frontolateral partial laryngectomy 71% was cured. It is  important to realize that in case of a new recurrence, a total  laryngectomy can be performed without an extra risk of failure for  therapy. Both partial laryngectomy techniques, CO2 laser and  frontolateral partial laryngectomy, are good treatment modalities for  recurrent glottic laryngeal cancer. However, the indications for the  different techniques are important and should be followed strictly. In chapter III the functional and oncological results of the third  partial laryngectomy technique, cricohyoidoepiglottopexy (CHEP), is  described. With the CHEP 79% of the patients are cured with  preservation of the larynx. In eight patients a Flexible Endoscopic  Evaluation of Swallowing (FEES) was performed to objectify problems  swallowing. In none of the patients aspiration was found. Before and  after the operation the voice was recorded and judged. After the  operation the voice is worst. However, most patients are satisfied  with there voice. The CHEP appears oncologically safe and functional  for the treatment of recurrent glottic laryngeal cancer in selected  patients. In chapter IV was investigated whether the quality of life is  different after a partial laryngectomy versus a total laryngectomy  for recurrent laryngeal carcinomas after radiotherapy. Also the voice  of both groups of patients was judged. The quality of life was  investigated with the EORTC Quality of Life Questionnaire (QLQ) – C30  Dutch version 3.0 and the EORTC – H & N 35 questionnaire. The only  difference found was smell and taste related. The voice was judged  with the Voice Handicap Index. No differences between the two groups  were found. There are no big differences in quality of life after  treatment with a partial or a total laryngectomy. This is mainly  caused by the unexpected good quality of life after a total  laryngectomy. In chapter V the treatment of hypopharyngeal cancer in the  Netherlands is described. The treatment of hypopharyngeal cancer in  the period 1985 – 1994 was investigated. The biggest group of  patients was treated with radiotherapy alone or with combined  radiotherapy and surgery. The overall 5-year disease-free survival  after treatment with curative intention was 32%. The disease-free  survival is better after combined surgery and radiotherapy. In chapter VI, the complications after salvage surgery in patients  prior treated with radiotherapy alone or chemoradiation is described.  The post-operative complication rate is significantly higher (92% vs.  50%) in the chemoradiation group. The most frequent complication  found was a pharygocutaneous fistula. The quality of life, after a  longer post-operative period, showed a significant difference in  social functioning in disadvantage of the chemoradiation group. In the general discussion (chapter VII) the found results are  discussed. The most important conclusion is that there is place for  organ preservation therapy, but we must remain critical of  indications and side effects of organ preservation protocols while we  should realize that quality of life after total laryngectomy are not  as poor as we might sometimes think.